# FaceMaskDetectionSystem

As of January 28, 2020, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has infected more than 100 million individuals worldwide and caused more than 2.1 million deaths (Worldometer, n.d.). Emergency lockdowns have been initiated in countries across the globe, and the effect on health, wellbeing, business, and other aspects of daily life are felt throughout societies and by individuals. According to the ILO Monitor: COVID-19 and the world of work: 5th Edition, there was a 14 per cent drop in global working hours during the second quarter of 2020, equivalent to the loss of 400 million full-time jobs (ILO, n.d.). With a limited availability of vaccines, reducing the rate of infection (i.e., flattening the curve) is a priority, and prevention of infection is the best approach to achieve this aim. 
 Artificial Intelligence (AI) based on Machine learning and Deep Learning can help to fight Covid-19 in many ways. Machine learning allows researchers and clinicians evaluate vast quantities of data to forecast the distribution of COVID-19, to serve as an early warning mechanism for potential pandemics, and to classify vulnerable populations. The provision of healthcare needs funding for emerging technology such as artificial intelligence, IoT, big data and machine learning to tackle and predict new diseases. To better understand infection rates and to trace and quickly detect infections, the AI’s power is being exploited to address the Covid-19 pandemic. People are forced by laws to wear face masks in public in many countries. Many countries require by law that individuals wear masks in public. In other instances, mask-wearing is required by private institutions, such as grocery stores or shopping malls. These rules and laws were developed as an action to the exponential growth in cases and deaths in many areas. However, the process of monitoring large groups of people is becoming more difficult. The monitoring process involves the detection of anyone who is not wearing a face mask.
Here we introduce Therefore, we have created a face mask face detection model that is based on computer vision and deep learning. The proposed model can be integrated with surveillance cameras to impede the COVID-19 transmission by allowing the detection of people who are wearing masks not wearing face masks. The model is a integration between of deep learning and classical machine learning techniques with YOLO v5, OpenCV, Pytorch and Torchvision. 

